Version 1.0.1 released 02/13/25

This version includes a patch that corrects the radar scan field border code. Specifically, this added comparing the firing rate/correlation value to the centroid-specific value for that during the scan. The code had a bug where all centroid values were being compared to determine if a point below the non-field filtering threshold was found. In practice, in some cases, this has been observed to cause the fields detected to be a smaller size relative to the non-field filtering threshold. The effect this patch creates is each field appears to have its radar scan field boundary detection more localized to the firing rate/correlation value of the centroid of that field.

The suggested default non-field filtering threshold remains as 0.31 (31%). Testing has found that threshold performs better than values below that in terms of field detection. This is based on testing with the 30 animal-recorded cells used in (Sutton et al, 2024). The results of this performance testing can be viewed at https://hco-dev-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/gridcell_metrics/performance_tests.html . One can increase the `outlier_allowance` parameter value to increase detected field areas but this also includes the potential of greater field merging issues.

The performance testing earlier mentioned does not score field sizes detected relative to fields found in animal recordings because that is considered too subjective. For example, at what point specifically in each field is a firing rate/correlation value too small to be considered outside the field? This software approximates this by using methods such as the non-field filtering threshold. This approach of not including that in performance measurements is akin to that approach used in (R. G. et al., 2024). Subjectively, this patch reducing the detected field size (in some cases) relative to the non-field filtering threshold, and still recommending the same non-field filtering threshold as a default value, could in theory mean that the results using that threshold are somewhat less accurate. However, subjectively, this patch appears to only have created a limited effect on field size detection overall. It was decided that implementing the algorithm correctly, as intended, is predicted to create better results overall as compared to the non-patched version. Therefore this patch is included in the main software code even with this effect on detection.

References:
Rebecca, R. G., Ascoli, G. A., Sutton, N. M., & Dannenberg, H. (2024). Spatial periodicity in grid cell firing is explained by a neural sequence code of 2-D trajectories. eLife, 13.

Sutton, N. M., Gutiérrez-Guzmán, B. E., Dannenberg, H., & Ascoli, G. A. (2024). A Continuous Attractor Model with Realistic Neural and Synaptic Properties Quantitatively Reproduces Grid Cell Physiology. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 25(11), 6059.